## Extensions Basics

An **extension** of a field $F$ is a field containing $F$ as a subfield. This extension can be though of an $F$-algebra whose underlying ring is a field. An extension $E$ of $F$ is an $F$-vector space whose dimension is called the **degree** $|E:F|$  of $E$ over $F$. An extension is said to be **finite** (resp. **quadratic, cubic**, etc.) if its degree is finite.

When $E$ and $E'$ are extensions of $F$, an $F$-**homomorphism** $E \rightarrow E'$ is a homorphism $\phi : E \rightarrow E'$ such that $\phi(c) = c$ for all $c \in F$. An $F$-**isomorphism** is a bijective $F$-homomorphism

---

**Proposition 1 (Multiplicity of Degrees):** Consider extensions $L \supset E\supset F$.  Then $L / F$ is of finite degree iff $L/E$ and $E/F$ are both of finite degree, in which case $$|L:F| = |L:E| \space |E:F|$$ 
Proof: If $L$ is finite over $F$, then is is finite over $E$, and as $E$ is a subspace of a finite dimensional $F$-vector space, it is also finite-dimensional.

Thus now assume that $L / E$ and $E / F$ are of finite degree, and let $(e_i)_{1 \leq i \leq m}$ be a basis for $E$ as an $F$-vector space and let $(l_i)_{1 \leq j \leq n}$ be a basis for $L$ as an $E$-vector space. We will now show that $(e_il_j)_{1 \leq i \leq m, 1 \leq j \leq n}$ is a basis for $L$ over $F$.

First, $(e_il_j)_{1 \leq i \leq m, 1 \leq j \leq n}$ space L. Let $\gamma \in L$. Then, because $(l_i)_{1 \leq j \leq n}$ space $L$ as an $E$-vector space, $$\gamma = \sum\limits_{j}\alpha_jl_{j} \space \text{ for some } \alpha_{j} \in F$$
and because $(e_i)_{1 \leq i \leq m}$ spans $E$ as an $F$-vector space, $$\alpha_{j}= \sum\limits_{i}a_{ij}e_{j} \space \text{some } a_{ij} \in F.$$
Putting these together we find that $$\gamma = \sum\limits_{i,j}a_{ij}e_{i}l_{j}$$
Second, this basis is linearly independent as the sum of the $e_i$ terms can only be 0 if they are all 0, and then same for the $l_j$ terms.

---

- An extension $E$ of $F$ is called **simple** if $E = F(\alpha)$ for some $\alpha  \in E$.

- If $F$ and $F'$ are subfields of a field $E$, we call the composite of $F$ and $F'$ in $E$ to be the smallest subfield containing both. We denote it by $F \cdot F'$.

- Let $f$ be a monic irreducible polynomial in $F[X]$. We call $E$ a **stem field for f** if $E = F[\alpha]$ and $f(\alpha) = 0$.

- An element $\alpha$ is **transcendental over** $F$ if $f(\alpha) \implies f =0$ (in $F[X]$). This is equivalent to saying that $\alpha$ is not the root of any polynomial in $F[X]$.

- If $\alpha$ is the root of a nonzero polynomial in $F[X]$, then we say that $\alpha$ is **algebraic over** $F$. The polynomials such that $\alpha$ is a root form an ideal over $F[X]$, generated by the **minimal** polynomial of $\alpha$.

- An extension $E$ is called algebraic if every element of $E$ is algebraic over $F$. Else it is said to be transcendental. All finite extensions are algebraic and extensions generated by a finite set of algebraic elements if finite.

- A polynomial is said to **split** in $F[X]$ is is a product of monic polynomials in $F[X]$.

- A field is **algebraically closed** if all polynomials in it split in the field.